1. Öjnlike Depot
================

Öjnlike harbour sits in the gut of a natural silt bay, a calm slice of crescent coast supported on both sides by kilometres of barnacled limestone. The harbour and its neighbouring residential streets face nothing to the south but vast uninterrupted low farmland, standing quietly and largely uncultivated except the occasional field bean crop, and all face out towards an interminable and busy sea.

There is a single entrance and exit to the town by road, which runs plumb to the southern horizon, and parallel to the freight rail - many years its senior - that sees far more traffic. The port workers, their patrons, and the residents in the small industry town together count a thousand or so (and represent the entire population of the country’s northernmost *landkreis*) but travellers rarely visit, and the inhabitants rarely travel except for work. Work that inevitably involves the shipping of things in and out of the small port harbour.

The harbour there emanates an interminable sound scape of gulls cawing, of waves lapping, workmen chatting, steel cables clinking, as fishermen unload their catch and miscellaneous containers are hoisted off of small cargo lighters and onto the freight rail service, which runs day and night, each day of the week, and is the lifeblood of this otherwise quiescent settlement.

Between shipments the port men and women, uniformed in their blue bib overalls, sit against the small fishery cabins that line the outer harbour buttress, and do little more than drink bottled beer by the case. Local faces are dark and weathered, but exude the cheery, unconcerned optimism of folk with hard work and simple aspirations. Their town is best characterised by its trade: each of its compact streets faces inwards towards the port or its depot, and the smells of industry - of the sea, of petroleum, fish, and exhaust - mingle together and pervade throughout the town and, to a lesser extent, the people too. Local spirits rise and fall with the prosperity of their commerce, which in recent years has suffered a slight but noticeable dip - with no consensus among the workers as to why.

Despite it being a focal point to the town, it is a stretch of the definition to call the flat concrete and single rail track at Öjnlike a ‘depot’. Its single defining feature is an outmoded crane, half yellow half rusted, which sits on sunken steel tracks that run between the buffer stop and the jetty. But asides this veteran giant, the establishment - which is demarked on three sides by an also rusted chain-link fence - bears little resemblance to the immense machines found in larger city ports. Concrete slabs pave the entire surface, from the rail entrance to the edge of the jetty, and between each sprouts a meagre tuft of plant life which in places has eroded away what was undoubtedly once a firm foundation.

Multimodal containers, theoretically in a variety of colours though in reality mostly a kind of brown, are stacked two-high on the slabs beside the rail, awaiting the continuation of their international journeys. They are almost exclusively the passengers on this portion of the rail network, which was built for and is maintained by an age-old local cooperative representing the interests of the commercial port.

When asked for the time of the next arrival, a local worker gave me the sense that workers at Öjnlike treat scheduling with a characteristically laissez-faire attitude. The squat labourer, who appeared to operate some portion of the loading and unloading of containers, stood hunched in his crude, oil tarnished blue overalls, and was preoccupied with the cleaning of some nameless metal component. Squinting in one eye, he studied the item and forced a blackened rag through its centre.

“When one comes it comes” he said, nonchalantly and in a quiet nasal tone. “Sofija calls out the numbers, that’s all I need or care for,” he motioned with the rag, still squinting, to a small working hut. “You should ask her.” Despite his casual manner, some malcontent entered the mix as he said that final word.

"How do you find working at Öjnlike depot?" I asked, with my new (unseasoned) journalist hat firmly in place. I eagerly began to pull the notepad from my satchel, but the workman produced a grunt and walked away.

